Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: pressure,
flow and fluid dynamics. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. Why are pressure and flow such important concepts in anaesthesia,
and how are they related?
Pressure and flow are among the most pervasive physical concepts in anaesthesia,
because our practice is built upon the movement of fluids — both gases and liquids
— driven by pressure differences, and because we measure pressures and flows
constantly.
A fluid is anything that flows, encompassing both gases and liquids,
and the principles of fluid dynamics apply to both.
Pressure is force per unit area, and flow is the volume of fluid passing a point
per unit time.
The two are fundamentally linked, because flow is driven by a difference in
pressure: fluid moves from a region of higher pressure to one of lower pressure,
and the relationship between the driving pressure difference and the resulting flow
is governed by the resistance of the system.
This pressure–flow–resistance relationship is the unifying principle,
analogous to Ohm's law in electricity,
where flow equals the pressure difference divided by the resistance.
These concepts underlie an enormous range of anaesthetic phenomena:
the flow of gases through the anaesthetic machine and breathing system;
the flow of blood through vessels and of intravenous fluids through cannulae;
the movement of air in and out of the lungs against airway resistance;
and the function of the many devices we use to measure and control flow.
So pressure and flow are central because anaesthesia is the management of fluid
movement driven by pressure differences,
related through resistance in a manner analogous to Ohm's law,
and these principles underlie gas delivery, blood and fluid flow,
ventilation and the measurement devices we rely upon.
Define the types of pressure relevant to clinical measurement,
including hydrostatic pressure.
Pressure, defined as force per unit area,
is expressed in several ways depending on the reference point chosen,
and distinguishing these is important for correct measurement.
Absolute pressure is the pressure measured relative to a perfect vacuum — the true
total pressure.
Gauge pressure is the pressure measured relative to the surrounding atmospheric
pressure, so that it is the amount by which the pressure exceeds atmospheric;
most clinical and cylinder gauges read gauge pressure,
reading zero at atmospheric pressure,
so that absolute pressure is gauge pressure plus atmospheric.
Atmospheric pressure itself is the pressure exerted by the weight of the
atmosphere, about one hundred and one kilopascals at sea level,
falling with altitude.
A particularly important form for clinical measurement is hydrostatic pressure —
the pressure exerted by a column of fluid due to its weight,
which depends on the height of the column,
the density of the fluid and the acceleration due to gravity.
Hydrostatic pressure explains why a column of fluid can be used to measure
pressure, as in the mercury or water manometer,
and why the height of a fluid column matters:
the pressure at the bottom of a taller or denser column is greater.
It is clinically critical in the levelling of pressure transducers,
since a transducer placed above or below the reference point reads falsely low or
high by the hydrostatic pressure of the height difference,
and in the height of an intravenous fluid bag,
which provides the driving pressure for infusion.
So clinical pressures are expressed as absolute, gauge or atmospheric,
and hydrostatic pressure — the pressure of a fluid column proportional to its
height and density — underlies manometry,
the levelling of transducers and the driving of gravity infusions.
Define flow, and distinguish it from velocity.
Flow and velocity are related but distinct quantities,
and confusing them leads to error, so the distinction is worth establishing clearly.
Flow, more precisely volumetric flow rate,
is the volume of fluid passing a given point per unit time — for instance litres
per minute of gas or millilitres per hour of fluid.
Velocity, by contrast, is the speed at which the fluid is moving — the distance
travelled per unit time, in metres per second.
The two are connected through the cross-sectional area of the conduit:
the volumetric flow equals the velocity of the fluid multiplied by the
cross-sectional area through which it passes.
This relationship has an important consequence.
For a constant volumetric flow, the velocity must change inversely with the
cross-sectional area: where a tube narrows,
the same volume of fluid per unit time must pass through a smaller area,
so the velocity increases; where it widens, the velocity falls.
This is the principle of continuity — what flows in must flow out — and it explains
why fluid speeds up through a constriction,
which is fundamental to the Bernoulli and Venturi effects we shall discuss.
It also matters in the circulation,
where blood velocity is high in the narrow aorta and very low in the vast combined
cross-section of the capillaries, facilitating exchange.
So flow is the volume passing per unit time while velocity is the speed of
movement, related by the cross-sectional area,
with the consequence that for constant flow the velocity rises where the conduit
narrows and falls where it widens — the principle of continuity underlying much of
fluid dynamics.
Describe laminar flow and the Hagen-Poiseuille relationship.
Laminar flow is the smooth, orderly flow of a fluid that occurs at lower flow rates
through smooth, straight tubes, and it is described quantitatively by the
Hagen-Poiseuille relationship, one of the most important in anaesthetic physics.
In laminar flow, the fluid moves in concentric layers, or laminae,
that slide smoothly over one another without mixing,
with the central layer moving fastest and the layer at the wall essentially
stationary, giving a parabolic velocity profile across the tube.
For such flow, the Hagen-Poiseuille equation states that the flow rate is directly
proportional to the pressure difference driving it and to the fourth power of the
radius of the tube, and inversely proportional to the length of the tube and to the
viscosity of the fluid.
The most striking and clinically important feature is the dependence on the fourth
power of the radius: doubling the radius increases the flow sixteen-fold,
while halving it reduces the flow to a sixteenth.
This extreme sensitivity to radius dominates the relationship and has profound
practical consequences for the flow through cannulae, airways and vessels.
The dependence on viscosity, rather than density, is characteristic of laminar flow.
So laminar flow is smooth, layered flow with a parabolic profile,
governed by the Hagen-Poiseuille relationship in which flow is proportional to the
driving pressure and to the fourth power of the radius and inversely proportional
to length and viscosity — the fourth-power dependence on radius being the dominant
and most clinically significant feature.
Draw out the practical consequences of that fourth-power dependence on radius.
The dependence of laminar flow on the fourth power of the radius is one of the most
clinically consequential facts in anaesthetic physics,
and its implications recur throughout our practice.
The first and most direct application is to intravenous access:
the flow through a cannula depends on the fourth power of its internal radius and
inversely on its length, so a short,
wide cannula delivers vastly more flow than a long, narrow one.
This is why, for rapid fluid resuscitation,
a short large-bore peripheral cannula is far superior to a long narrow central line
of the same gauge — the length and radius working against the central line despite
its central position.
The standard cannula gauges reflect this,
each step up in bore producing a disproportionate increase in maximal flow.
The same principle governs airway resistance:
a small reduction in the radius of an airway,
as in a partially obstructed or oedematous airway, or a narrow tracheal tube,
produces a large increase in resistance and a large fall in flow,
which is why airway oedema is so dangerous in small children,
whose airways are already narrow, and why the smallest appropriate reduction in
tracheal tube size markedly increases resistance.
It governs vascular resistance, where small changes in arteriolar radius produce
large changes in resistance and flow, the basis of vascular tone control.
So the fourth-power law means that radius dominates flow,
explaining why short wide cannulae resuscitate best,
why small airway narrowing causes large resistance rises,
and why arteriolar radius is the key regulator of vascular resistance.
Describe turbulent flow and the Reynolds number.
Turbulent flow is the disorderly form of fluid flow that occurs at higher flow
rates, through constrictions, sharp bends or irregular passages,
and it differs from laminar flow in its character,
its governing relationships and the property of the fluid that matters.
In turbulent flow, the orderly layers break down into chaotic eddies and swirls,
with mixing across the stream and a flatter velocity profile;
energy is dissipated in the eddies, so turbulent flow is less efficient,
requiring a greater pressure to drive a given flow.
The relationships governing it differ from the laminar case:
in turbulent flow the flow rate is no longer directly proportional to the driving
pressure but to its square root, so that to double turbulent flow the pressure must
be quadrupled, and the flow depends on the density of the fluid rather than its
viscosity.
Whether flow is laminar or turbulent is predicted by the Reynolds number,
a dimensionless quantity calculated from the fluid's velocity,
density and viscosity and the diameter of the tube.
A low Reynolds number, below about two thousand, predicts laminar flow;
a high Reynolds number, above about four thousand, predicts turbulent flow;
between these lies a transitional zone. High velocity, high density,
low viscosity and large diameter all favour turbulence.
So turbulent flow is chaotic, eddying flow in which flow is proportional to the
square root of the pressure and depends on density rather than viscosity,
and the Reynolds number, computed from velocity, density, viscosity and diameter,
predicts the transition from laminar to turbulent flow.
Define viscosity, and comment on the non-Newtonian behaviour of blood.
Viscosity is the property of a fluid that governs laminar flow,
and understanding it, together with the special behaviour of blood,
is important for both gas and fluid dynamics.
Viscosity is a measure of a fluid's internal friction — its resistance to the
sliding of its layers over one another, and hence its resistance to flow.
A viscous fluid such as syrup resists flow strongly;
a fluid of low viscosity such as water flows readily.
Viscosity governs the rate of laminar flow,
appearing in the Hagen-Poiseuille equation,
and it generally falls with rising temperature for liquids but rises with
temperature for gases.
A Newtonian fluid is one whose viscosity is constant regardless of the flow
conditions — water and most simple fluids are Newtonian.
Blood, however, is a non-Newtonian fluid:
its viscosity is not constant but changes with the conditions of flow,
principally because it is a suspension of cells in plasma.
At low flow rates and in small vessels its apparent viscosity falls,
partly because the red cells align and stream in the centre — and in the smallest
vessels the Fahraeus-Lindqvist effect reduces the effective haematocrit and
viscosity.
Blood viscosity also rises markedly with the haematocrit,
so that polycythaemia greatly increases viscosity and the work of the heart,
while anaemia reduces it.
So viscosity is a fluid's internal friction governing laminar flow,
constant in a Newtonian fluid such as water but variable in blood,
which is non-Newtonian — its apparent viscosity falling at low flow and in small
vessels and rising steeply with haematocrit, with consequences for the circulation.
How is resistance to flow defined and related to these principles?
Resistance to flow is the opposition that a system offers to the passage of fluid,
and it provides the unifying link between pressure and flow,
analogous to electrical resistance.
Resistance is defined, by analogy with Ohm's law,
as the pressure difference driving the flow divided by the flow rate produced;
equivalently, flow equals the pressure difference divided by the resistance.
A system of high resistance requires a large pressure difference to produce a given
flow, while a low-resistance system allows the same flow for a small pressure.
The determinants of resistance follow from the flow relationships:
for laminar flow through a tube, rearranging the Hagen-Poiseuille equation shows
that resistance is proportional to the length and the viscosity and inversely
proportional to the fourth power of the radius — so resistance, like flow,
is dominated by the radius, a small narrowing greatly increasing resistance.
Resistances combine like electrical resistances: in series they add,
while in parallel the total resistance is less than any individual one,
which is why the many parallel capillaries of a vascular bed offer relatively low
total resistance.
This concept of resistance underlies systemic and pulmonary vascular resistance in
the circulation, airway resistance in ventilation,
and the resistance of breathing systems and equipment.
So resistance is the pressure difference divided by the flow,
dominated for laminar flow by the fourth power of the radius and also by length and
viscosity, combining in series and parallel,
and it is the unifying concept linking pressure and flow across the circulation,
the airways and our equipment.
Explain the Bernoulli principle.
The Bernoulli principle describes the relationship between the velocity and the
pressure of a fluid in motion, and it explains a family of effects important in
anaesthetic equipment.
The principle, derived from the conservation of energy in a flowing fluid,
states that as the velocity of a fluid increases, its pressure decreases,
and conversely.
The underlying reason is that the total energy of the fluid — the sum of its
pressure energy, its kinetic energy of motion,
and its potential energy of height — is conserved along a streamline;
so if the kinetic energy increases because the fluid speeds up,
the pressure energy must fall to compensate, and the pressure drops.
The most important application arises where a fluid flows through a constriction.
By the principle of continuity, the fluid must speed up as it passes through the
narrowing to maintain the same volumetric flow; by Bernoulli's principle,
this increase in velocity is accompanied by a fall in pressure at the constriction.
Thus a region of low pressure is created at the narrowest point of a constriction
where the fluid moves fastest.
This counterintuitive result — that pressure is lowest where the fluid is moving
fastest, at the narrowest point — is the basis of the Venturi effect and of gas
entrainment devices.
So the Bernoulli principle, from the conservation of energy,
states that a faster-moving fluid has a lower pressure,
with the key consequence that fluid speeding up through a constriction develops a
low pressure there — the foundation of the Venturi effect.
Describe the Venturi effect and its clinical applications.
The Venturi effect is the practical application of the Bernoulli principle to a
constriction, and it is exploited in several important pieces of anaesthetic and
respiratory equipment, chiefly to entrain a second fluid.
When a fluid flows through a Venturi — a tube with a narrowing followed by a
gradual widening — the velocity increases and the pressure falls at the
constriction, as Bernoulli's principle predicts.
If a side opening is placed at this low-pressure point, the low pressure draws in,
or entrains, fluid from outside through that opening,
mixing it with the main stream. This entrainment of a second fluid is the basis of
the clinical applications.
The Venturi, or fixed-performance, oxygen mask uses a jet of oxygen passing through
a constriction to entrain a fixed, large volume of room air, delivering a precise,
constant inspired oxygen concentration regardless of the patient's breathing
pattern — the ratio of entrained air to oxygen, set by the device,
fixing the concentration.
Nebulisers use the effect to entrain and atomise liquid into a fine mist.
Venturi-based suction and the entrainment in some jet-ventilation systems work
similarly, a driving jet entraining additional gas.
The gradual widening of the Venturi after the constriction is important,
allowing the kinetic energy to be recovered as pressure with minimal turbulence.
So the Venturi effect uses the low pressure at a constriction to entrain a second
fluid, exploited in fixed-performance oxygen masks delivering precise oxygen
concentrations, in nebulisers, and in jet-ventilation and suction devices.
What is the Coanda effect, and where is it relevant?
The Coanda effect is a related phenomenon of fluid dynamics describing the tendency
of a fluid jet to follow and cling to a nearby surface or wall rather than
travelling in a straight line, and it has both clinical relevance and applications
in equipment.
When a high-velocity jet of fluid passes close to a surface,
the entrainment of fluid between the jet and the surface lowers the pressure there,
by the Bernoulli mechanism, so the jet is drawn towards and adheres to the surface,
following its contour even around a curve.
At a branching point, this can cause a jet to attach preferentially to one wall and
so pass down one branch rather than dividing evenly between the two.
The Coanda effect has clinical relevance in the airway and circulation:
at the branching of airways or vessels,
it may cause uneven distribution of flow between the two branches,
so that secretions, emboli or gas flow may preferentially follow one side,
which can contribute to maldistribution of ventilation or to the lodging of
material in particular bronchi.
It also explains the maldistribution of flow past irregularities such as plaques or
stenoses.
In equipment, the effect is harnessed in fluidic devices,
in which the switching of a gas jet between channels by the Coanda effect,
controlled by small pressure signals,
is used to create valveless logic — the principle behind certain fluidic
ventilators that have no moving parts.
So the Coanda effect is the tendency of a jet to cling to an adjacent surface,
relevant to the uneven distribution of flow at airway and vascular branch points
and harnessed in the valveless fluidic ventilators.
Distinguish flow through an orifice from flow through a tube.
The distinction between flow through an orifice and flow through a tube is an
important one in anaesthetic physics,
because the two are governed by different fluid properties,
which has practical consequences.
A tube is a passage whose length is much greater than its diameter,
whereas an orifice is a constriction whose length is small relative to its diameter
— essentially a thin restriction.
Flow through a long tube, at low rates,
tends to be laminar and so is governed by the Hagen-Poiseuille relationship,
depending on the viscosity of the fluid.
Flow through an orifice, by contrast,
tends to be turbulent even at relatively low flows,
because of the abrupt constriction,
and so depends on the density of the fluid rather than its viscosity.
This distinction explains the behaviour of certain devices and the rationale for
using particular gas mixtures.
A constriction in the airway, such as a stenosis or a partially closed glottis,
behaves as an orifice, so flow through it depends on gas density;
this is why a low-density helium–oxygen mixture, Heliox,
improves flow through such an obstruction, reducing the work of breathing,
whereas it would not help laminar flow through a normal tube.
The behaviour of flowmeters also reflects this distinction, as we shall see,
the variable-orifice flowmeter behaving differently at low flows,
where the gap is long and thin and viscosity matters, and at high flows,
where it behaves more like an orifice and density matters.
So flow through a long tube is typically laminar and viscosity-dependent,
while flow through a short orifice is typically turbulent and density-dependent —
explaining the benefit of low-density Heliox through airway constrictions and the
dual behaviour of flowmeters.
Describe the variable-orifice flowmeter, the rotameter.
The variable-orifice flowmeter, commonly called the rotameter,
is the classic device for measuring and setting gas flows on the anaesthetic
machine, and its operation elegantly combines the principles of flow we have
discussed.
The rotameter consists of a vertical, transparent tube that is tapered,
being narrower at the bottom and wider at the top,
containing a lightweight bobbin or float.
Gas enters at the bottom and flows upward, lifting the bobbin;
the bobbin rises until the upward force of the gas flow balances the downward force
of gravity on it.
As the bobbin rises in the widening tube,
the annular gap between the bobbin and the tube wall — the variable orifice —
increases, so that a higher flow is needed to keep the bobbin suspended at a higher
level; the height of the bobbin thus indicates the flow,
read against a calibrated scale.
The orifice is variable, widening as the bobbin rises,
while the pressure difference across the bobbin stays roughly constant — hence
variable-orifice, constant-pressure.
The device depends on both viscosity and density:
at low flows the gap is long and thin, flow is laminar and viscosity matters;
at high flows the gap is short and wide, flow is turbulent and density matters.
Each rotameter is therefore calibrated for a specific gas and is not
interchangeable. The bobbin must rotate freely and not stick,
and is read at the top, or at the centre of a ball float.
So the rotameter is a variable-orifice,
constant-pressure flowmeter in which a bobbin rises in a tapered tube until flow
balances gravity, indicating flow on a gas-specific calibrated scale,
its behaviour depending on viscosity at low flows and density at high flows.
Briefly, what other methods are used to measure gas flow?
Beyond the variable-orifice rotameter,
several other methods are used to measure gas flow,
particularly in modern electronic anaesthetic machines and ventilators,
each exploiting a physical principle.
The pneumotachograph measures flow by sensing the small pressure drop across a
fixed, known resistance placed in the gas stream — a fine mesh or array of parallel
tubes designed to keep the flow laminar, so that,
by the Hagen-Poiseuille relationship,
the pressure drop is proportional to the flow;
integrating the flow signal over time gives the volume,
which is how tidal volumes are derived.
Variants use a fixed orifice or a flap whose pressure drop indicates flow.
The hot-wire anemometer measures flow from the cooling of a heated wire by the
passing gas: faster flow removes more heat,
and the electrical power needed to keep the wire at constant temperature indicates
the flow rate.
Ultrasonic flowmeters measure flow from its effect on the transit time of
ultrasound pulses sent with and against the stream.
The Wright respirometer is a mechanical vane device,
in which the gas flow turns a vane whose rotation is geared to a dial indicating
volume.
Bellows and water-displacement spirometers measure volume directly.
Each method has its accuracy, its sources of error and its applications.
So gas flow is also measured by the pneumotachograph,
sensing the pressure drop across a fixed laminar resistance;
by hot-wire anemometers; by ultrasonic transit-time devices;
and by mechanical vane respirometers — methods used in modern machines to measure
flows and, by integration, volumes.
Apply these principles to intravenous fluid administration.
The administration of intravenous fluids is a direct and everyday application of
the principles of pressure, flow and resistance,
and understanding it allows rational choices in resuscitation.
The flow of fluid into a vein is driven by a pressure difference — the hydrostatic
pressure of the fluid column from the raised bag,
plus any applied pressure from a pressure bag or pump,
minus the venous pressure — and opposed by the resistance of the giving set and the
cannula.
The resistance is dominated, through the Hagen-Poiseuille relationship,
by the cannula: flow is proportional to the fourth power of its internal radius and
inversely proportional to its length. The practical consequences are clear.
To achieve rapid flow for resuscitation,
one chooses a cannula of large bore and short length, since both maximise flow,
and one raises the driving pressure by elevating or pressurising the bag.
A short, wide peripheral cannula will therefore deliver fluid far faster than a
long, narrow central catheter, even though the latter is centrally placed — a point
of real importance in major haemorrhage,
where the temptation to rely on a central line for rapid transfusion is misguided.
Warming fluids reduces their viscosity slightly and so aids flow,
besides preventing hypothermia. The standard cannula gauges are calibrated to known
maximal flow rates, each larger bore giving a disproportionately greater flow.
So intravenous flow is driven by the hydrostatic and applied pressure and opposed
by resistance dominated by the cannula's radius to the fourth power and its length
— so that short, wide cannulae and raised driving pressure give the rapid flow
needed for resuscitation.
Explain wall tension and the law of Laplace, with its clinical relevance.
The law of Laplace relates the pressure within a curved structure to the tension in
its wall and its radius, and it has wide relevance in anaesthesia,
applying to blood vessels, the heart,
the alveoli and other curved fluid-containing structures.
The law states that, for a given structure,
the relationship between the transmural pressure,
the wall tension and the radius depends on the geometry:
for a cylinder such as a blood vessel,
the wall tension is proportional to the pressure multiplied by the radius;
for a sphere such as an alveolus or a bubble,
the relationship involves the pressure, the radius and,
where a surface separates fluids, the surface tension,
with the pressure inside being proportional to twice the surface tension divided by
the radius.
The clinical applications are several.
In the vasculature, Laplace's law explains why the thin-walled capillaries can
withstand their pressure despite their delicacy — because their radius is tiny,
the wall tension is low — and why an aneurysm, having a larger radius,
experiences greater wall tension at the same pressure,
predisposing it to further dilatation and rupture.
In the heart, it explains why a dilated ventricle with a large radius has a greater
wall tension and so a higher myocardial oxygen demand at a given pressure.
In the lung, it explains the behaviour of the alveoli and the crucial role of
surfactant.
So the law of Laplace relates transmural pressure to wall tension and radius —
tension proportional to pressure times radius in a cylinder — explaining the
resilience of capillaries, the rupture risk of aneurysms,
the increased oxygen demand of the dilated heart, and the behaviour of alveoli.
Discuss surface tension and its role in the alveolus.
Surface tension is a property of liquid surfaces that,
applied through the law of Laplace to the alveolus,
has profound importance in respiratory physiology and explains the vital role of
pulmonary surfactant.
Surface tension arises at the interface between a liquid and a gas because the
molecules at the surface are attracted more strongly to their neighbours within the
liquid than to the gas, creating a tension that tends to minimise the surface area,
making the surface behave like a stretched elastic membrane.
In the alveolus, lined by a thin film of fluid,
this surface tension tends to contract the alveolus, generating,
by the law of Laplace, an inward pressure proportional to the surface tension and
inversely proportional to the alveolar radius. This creates two problems.
First, the surface tension makes the lung stiffer and increases the work needed to
expand it.
Second, and more seriously, the Laplace relationship implies that smaller alveoli,
with their smaller radius, would generate a higher collapsing pressure than larger
ones, so that small alveoli would tend to empty into large ones and collapse — an
unstable situation.
Pulmonary surfactant, secreted by the alveolar type-two cells,
solves these problems: it lowers the surface tension,
and crucially it lowers it more in smaller alveoli than in larger ones,
because its molecules are more concentrated when the alveolus is small,
thereby stabilising alveoli of different sizes, preventing collapse,
reducing the work of breathing and keeping the lung compliant.
So surface tension at the alveolar air–liquid interface, through Laplace's law,
tends to collapse small alveoli and stiffen the lung,
and pulmonary surfactant counteracts this by lowering surface tension,
more so in smaller alveoli, stabilising them and easing breathing.
Finally, draw together the relevance of pressure,
flow and fluid dynamics to anaesthetic practice.
Drawing the station together, the principles of pressure,
flow and fluid dynamics run through the whole of anaesthesia,
because our specialty is fundamentally the management of fluids — gases and liquids
— moving under pressure, and a secure grasp of these principles informs both our
use of equipment and our understanding of physiology.
The unifying relationship is that flow is driven by a pressure difference and
opposed by resistance, analogous to Ohm's law.
The character of flow — laminar, smooth and viscosity-dependent,
governed by the Hagen-Poiseuille relationship with its dominant fourth-power
dependence on radius, or turbulent, chaotic and density-dependent,
predicted by the Reynolds number — determines how fluids behave in our conduits.
From these flow the practical themes: the choice of short,
wide cannulae for rapid resuscitation;
the disproportionate effect of small airway narrowing on resistance;
the use of low-density Heliox through orifice-like obstructions;
the function of rotameters and pneumotachographs;
the Bernoulli and Venturi effects underlying fixed-performance oxygen masks,
nebulisers and jet ventilation; the Coanda effect in flow distribution and fluidic
ventilators; and, through Laplace's law and surface tension,
the behaviour of vessels, the dilated heart and the alveolus with its dependence on
surfactant.
So pressure, flow and fluid dynamics are not abstract physics but the working
principles behind gas delivery, fluid resuscitation, ventilation,
monitoring and much of cardiorespiratory physiology — a foundation that repays
thorough understanding.
Apply these flow principles to airway resistance and the work of breathing.
Airway resistance and the work of breathing are direct applications of the
principles of flow, and understanding them physically illuminates both normal
respiratory mechanics and the effects of disease and equipment.
Air moving in and out of the lungs is driven by the pressure difference between the
alveoli and the mouth and opposed by the resistance of the airways.
In the larger airways and at higher flow rates,
and wherever the airway branches or narrows, flow is partly turbulent,
depending on gas density; in the smaller peripheral airways,
where the total cross-sectional area is large and velocity low,
flow is largely laminar, depending on viscosity,
and governed by the Hagen-Poiseuille relationship with its dominant dependence on
the fourth power of the radius.
This fourth-power dependence explains why narrowing of the airways — by
bronchoconstriction, secretions, oedema or a narrow tracheal tube — so greatly
increases resistance and the work needed to breathe.
The work of breathing is the energy expended to move air against the elastic recoil
of the lung and chest wall and against this airway resistance;
it rises when resistance increases, as in asthma or obstruction,
or when compliance falls.
During anaesthesia we add the resistance of the breathing system,
the tracheal tube and the valves, increasing the work of breathing,
which is why we often support or control ventilation,
and why tube and circuit dimensions matter.
In turbulent obstruction, low-density Heliox can reduce the work.
So airway resistance follows the flow principles — turbulent and density-dependent
in large airways, laminar and viscosity-dependent with fourth-power radius
sensitivity in small ones — and the work of breathing rises with resistance and
falls with compliance, increased by anaesthetic equipment and reducible,
in turbulent obstruction, by Heliox.
What is the hazard of siphoning and free flow in infusion systems,
and how is it related to pressure?
Siphoning and free flow are recognised hazards of intravenous infusion systems that
arise directly from the physics of pressure and flow,
and understanding them is important for the safe use of infusion devices,
particularly syringe and volumetric pumps delivering potent drugs.
Free flow is the uncontrolled, rapid flow of fluid or drug to the patient when the
controlling mechanism is bypassed — for example if the giving set is removed from a
volumetric pump without closing the roller clamp,
allowing gravity to drive an unregulated infusion;
this can deliver a dangerous bolus of a potent drug.
It is prevented by anti-free-flow mechanisms in the giving set and by always
clamping before removing the set.
Siphoning is a related hazard specific to syringe pumps:
if the syringe is mounted at a height significantly above the patient,
the hydrostatic pressure of the vertical fluid column can siphon the syringe
contents into the patient, drawing the plunger down faster than the pump intends
and delivering an uncontrolled overdose;
this is worsened if the syringe is loosely mounted or the plunger not properly
engaged.
The hydrostatic pressure responsible is the height of the column multiplied by the
fluid density and gravity, the same principle as in any fluid column.
Siphoning is prevented by mounting the pump at or near the patient's level,
ensuring the syringe is correctly seated with the plunger secured,
and using anti-siphon valves.
So siphoning and free flow are uncontrolled infusion hazards driven by hydrostatic
and gravitational pressure when the pump's control is bypassed or the syringe is
raised, prevented by anti-free-flow sets,
correct syringe mounting at patient level,
secure plunger engagement and anti-siphon valves.
Thank you. A comprehensive and accomplished account,
and a fitting close to this opening batch of physics stations.
That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Flow is driven by a pressure difference and opposed by resistance (analogous
to Ohm's law: flow equals pressure difference divided by resistance);
flow is volume per unit time, distinct from velocity (speed),
related by cross-sectional area.
Second, Laminar flow (smooth, viscosity-dependent) obeys the Hagen-Poiseuille
relationship - flow proportional to driving pressure and to the fourth power of the
radius, inversely to length and viscosity;
the fourth-power dependence on radius dominates (short wide cannulae resuscitate
best; small airway narrowing greatly raises resistance).
Third, Turbulent flow (chaotic, density-dependent) gives flow proportional to the
square root of pressure; the Reynolds number predicts the laminar-to-turbulent
transition; orifice flow is turbulent/density-dependent (hence low-density Heliox
helps airway obstruction) while tube flow is laminar/viscosity-dependent.
Fourth, The Bernoulli principle (faster fluid has lower pressure) underlies the
Venturi effect, which entrains a second fluid at a constriction - exploited in
fixed-performance oxygen masks (precise FiO2), nebulisers and jet ventilation;
the Coanda effect (jet clinging to a wall) affects branch-point flow and drives
fluidic ventilators.
Fifth, Laplace's law (wall tension proportional to pressure times radius in a
cylinder) explains capillary resilience,
aneurysm rupture risk and the dilated heart's increased oxygen demand;
alveolar surface
Thank you. That concludes the station.